(♪♪)
>> On this edition of "The
Fifth Estate."
>> He's a nasty, nasty guy.
He's a liar.
>> It may be the ugliest
election in U.S. history.
>> Go back where you come from.
>> And Donald Trump is the
reason why.
>> Get 'em out of here.
Get 'em out.
>> He's playing to the group
that feels should be a white
Christian America.
>> I will build a great, great
wall.
And I will have Mexico pay for
that wall.
Donald J. Trump is calling for
a total and complete shut down
of Muslims entering the United
States.
>> He's built a monster in
society right now that he has
to feed.
>> He's selling himself as
America's strong man and
Savior.
>> The facts don't matter.
They can be true or they can be
false.
As long as they're useful.
>> One thing is certain.
No one breathes fire like
Donald Trump.
>> I blow up every single inch.
>> People are not going to
realize what he's accomplished
until he's already in the white
house.
>> I'm Bob McKeown.
This is "The Fifth Estate".
(♪♪)
[Chanting USA]
>> Bob: January the 20th, 2017.
Inauguration day in Washington
D.C. the swearing in of the 45th
president of the United States,
Donald J. Trump.
>> Unbelievable.
Unbelievable.
>> Bob: It is a day many
believe they would never see.
And after which the USA may
never be the same.
>> We're gonna make America
great again!
[CHEERING]
[Chanting USA]
>> Bob: And it all began here
in June, 2015.
When Donald Trump descended
from his penthouse at the Trump
tower in New York City to
declare his candidacy for the
republican nomination for
president.
>> You know, all of my life
I've heard that a truly
successful person, a really,
really successful person, and
even modestly successful,
cannot run for public office.
Just can't happen.
And yet that's the kind of mind
set that you need to make this
country great again.
>> Bob: From the start there
was no doubt what the central
theme of Trump's election
campaign was going to be.
>> Sadly, the American dream is
dead.
But if I get elected president,
I will bring it back bigger and
better and stronger than ever
before, and we will make
America great again.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
>> Bob: Immediately the
political blood letting began.
The front page of the New York
daily news depicted Trump in
clown face and the vast
majority of pundits mocked his
prospects for the presidency.
>> My theory has always been
the UFO theory, the
unforeseeable occur.
Donald Trump is the perfect
example of the UFO theory.
When he first arrived I didn't
think he would get as far
as he did.
>> NBC news at this hour, I'm
Tom Brokaw.
>> Bob: For a quarter of a
century, Tom Brokaw occupied
one of the most influential
positions in American life as
anchor of NBC nightly news.
The 2017 inauguration will be
the 12th of his distinguished
career.
He admits he's never seen a
presidential campaign like this
before.
Thanks to Donald Trump.
>> First of all, he arrived in
the race more famous and richer
than any of the other
candidates.
People overlooked that.
He was better known in America
than any of the other
candidates.
And the fact that he was rich
and could finance his own
campaign resonated with people
out there.
What the American people really
want is financial security.
And they don't feel they have
that anymore.
And it had the country half
cocked in the ticked off
position at that point.
>> Half cocked and ticked off
as the U.S. has never been
before.
And that plays right to Donald
Trump's unique skill set.
According to political writer
Matt Taibbi of Rolling Stone
magazine.
>> He's not a politician, but he
also has this other thing that
nobody else has, which is
that he's a veteran reality
televison star, who understands
in a way that the other
politicians don't that
the election is just a reality
show.
And he's great at it.
>> You're fired.
Bradford, you're fired.
You're all fired.
All four are fired.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: It's more than name
recognition from 14 seasons as
the star of a hit reality show.
"The Apprentice" showcased
Trump as the no nonsense
billionaire boss who knows how
to solve problems and make
tough decisions.
Not to mention which buttons to
push to create conflict.
>> Long before Trump entered
this whole process, elections
became about finding the group
of people who are to blame for
your problems, and that's how
you win elections in America.
It's not a secret.
Everybody knows this.
The thing is Trump is just
really, really good at it.
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
>> Bob: And if Donald Trump is
a natural at the blame game,
his supporters are willing to
believe.
Because they may feel cheated
out of their rightful slice of
the American pie.
>> They just love what we're
doing.
We're going to take the country
back.
We're going to make it great
again.
>> Bob: And Trump targeted
those about whom many of his
supporters had unfavourable
feelings already.
Blaming terrorism, he set his
sights on the world's 1.6
billion Muslims.
>> Donald J. Trump is calling
for a total and complete
shut down of Muslims
entering the United
States, until our country's
representatives can figure out
what the hell is going on.
>> There are basically two news
stories about us, and it's no
one's fault, but there are.
There's the bad story where
we're described as
militant-government terrorists
and then the occasional positive
one where we're described as
alleged militant-government
terrorists.
>> Bob: Dean Obeidallah is a
writer, broadcaster and are
standup comic in New York, who's
also an American-born Muslim.
He sees Trump as a shrewd
businessman who knows his
market.
>> Things have not worked out
in their lives.
Things have not worked out in a
lot of Americans' lives.
The difference is most people
don't blame Mexicans or Muslims
or the others for their
problems.
>> Bob: Obeidallah says there is
anxiety among American Muslims
that Trump's call for a ban
would be just the beginning.
>> There's concern.
I mean, I'd say palpable fear,
frankly, that it won't end
there.
>> There is a great hatred
toward Americans by large
segments of the Muslim
population.
>> He needs to give red meat
to his base.
And that might be next special
I.D.'s for Muslims, which he
suggested.
Special registration for
Muslims.
It could be interim camps.
>> These are people who only
believe in jihad.
They have no respect for human
life.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: And then there's
Trump's proposed wall on the
Mexican border.
>> When Mexico sends its
people, they're not sending
their best.
They're sending people that
have lots of problems.
They're bringing drugs.
They're bringing crime.
They're rapists.
We're going to build the wall,
okay.
Believe me.
We're going to build the wall.
>> He loves attention.
And one of the things that he
discovered very early on in
this process is that when he
said certain things, he got an
overwhelming response.
Beginning with the thing about
Mexicans being rapists.
When he said that, it just set
off this fire storm in the
media.
>> Bob: That goes over well in
the heartland, where Arizona
sheriff Joe Arpaio is a
household name for his tough
tactics with illegal
immigrants.
He's endorsed Trump for
president and for his wall.
>> So when you talk about the
border, don't just talk about
illegal immigration.
That wall that he wants to put
up pertains to drug smuggling
into our country too.
>> Bob: And for the time being,
as a campaign ploy for Trump,
it's hitting its target.
>> Clearly the race thing,
which has been, you know, a
millimetre under the surface of
American politics for 50 years
now, you know, according to
sort of the gentleman's
agreement of Washington
politics, we never really come
out in the open and talk about
race in this country.
It's always by proxy.
Suddenly he has this enormous
following of people who in the
past were only communicating
with each other through these
very fringy far right KKK-style
organizations.
Now this is becoming a little
bit mainstream.
(♪♪)
>> Black power!
>> Yeah, white power!
>> I think it's as much
cultural and racial as is
anything else.
If we had a lot of annoying
Canadians come into America
illegally and were working
in jobs that Americans really
didn't want, people would say
how do we make them citizens.
How do we help them through all
this.
But brown-skinned,
Spanish-speaking people don't
fit in the idea of what a lot
of Americans want for the
future of this country, quite
honestly.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: Mixing race and
political incorrectness is
nothing new for Donald Trump.
And it may well will having an
effect.
In recent primary polls,
three-quarters of his
supporters say they're in
favour of the proposed ban on
Muslims entering the U.S.
and Trump has always shown
skill at stirring the pot to
separate traitors from
patriots.
It was the point man of the
so-called birther movement,
challenging president Barack
Obama to prove he's a
natural-born American and,
therefore, the legitimate
president.
>> I'm very honoured to have
gotten him to release his
long-form birth certificate.
Or whatever it may be.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: It all came to a head
in may, 2011 at the white house
correspondence dinner in
Washington.
Barack Obama, the guest of
honour.
Also in attendance, the man
questioning his right to be
president.
>> Donald Trump has been saying
he'll run for president as a
republican, which is surprising
since I just assumed he was
running as a joke.
[ Laughter ]
>> Bob: But for the Donald, the
needling was about to get much
worse.
>> Pres. Barack Obama: Donald
Trump is here tonight.
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
No one is happier, no one is
prouder to put this birth
certificate matter to rest
than the Donald.
And that's because he can
finally get back to focussing
on the issues that matter.
Like did we fake the moon
landing.
[LAUGHTER]
What really happened in Roswell?
And where are Biggy and Tupac?
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
>> Yeah, the president nailed
it.
I think he was angry.
I mean, I think he thought how
dare he take me on?
I'm more important.
>> Pres. Barack Obama:
All kidding aside, obviously
we all know about your
credentials and breadth of
experience.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Bob: Indeed, some suggest
being the butt of Barack
Obama's humour that night may
have triggered Donald Trump's
decision to run for the office
of president himself.
After the break, the making of
the would-be president.
>> Take a look at my next
guest.
This is Donald Trump 33 years
old.
>> But once you brought young
Donald, this fresh face, then
all of the media coverage was
focussed on this new young
star.
Doing this giant project.
>> Bob: How Donald Trump went
from this to this.
>> Get 'em out of here.
Get out.
Get 'em out of here.
(♪♪)
>> Trying to scrape up a down
payment for a little
fixer-uper in your neighborhood?
Take a look at my next guest.
This is Donald Trump, 33 years
old.
>> Bob: From the beginning,
Donald Trump's fame and fortune
have been linked as here in his
first appearance on NBC's
today show in 1980
with Tom Brokaw.
>> Donald Trump as I say is
just 33 years old.
He took his father's rather
modest by current standards
real estate empire in Brooklyn
and expanded it considerably.
>> Bob: At the time, his
signature Trump tower was
rising into the Manhattan
skyline.
>> He now has an apartment for
sale and a new Trump building
called the Trump tower going up
on 5th Avenue.
There it is.
You can buy this apartment, one
floor of it, one whole floor of
that building, it is, $11
million all together.
Mr. Trump, what's left in
you life?
You're 33 years old, you're
worth all this money.
You say you didn't say that you
want to be worth $1 billion.
>> I really don't.
I just want to be busy and keep
active and be interested in
what I do.
That's all there is to life as
far as I'm concerned.
>> Bob: That was over three
decades ago.
And for much of it, the real
New York tourist attraction has
been Donald Trump himself.
>> If you walk down 5th Avenue
at anytime of day, before all
this started, people are over
there having their picture
taken in front of the golden T.
I mean, he is the idea, and
many people's mind, of the
American dream realized.
He's rich and famous and
unapologetic about it.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: For all his claims of
being a self-made man, it was a
silver spoon that got him
launched.
Trump's father, Fred, had
amassed a $200 million fortune
building housing in the outer
borrows of New York City when
his son entered the business.
Fred was there to help.
>> He guaranteed the financing.
He brought him to his own
bankers to get the $35 million
loan that started the whole
process.
And Fred had to guarantee the
loans.
>> Bob: New York investigative
journalist Wayne Barrett wrote
the first probing feature on
Manhattan's new young real
estate mogul.
Then in 1992, an unauthorized
biography.
At the time, Trump was facing
bankruptcy.
He threatened to sue Barrett.
Then had him arrested at one
of his casinos.
Barrett says Trump's first
projects in Manhattan cost
hundreds of millions of dollars,
the financing arranged by
his dad.
Before long, the son became the
brand.
>> But once you brought young
Donald, this fresh face, then
all of the media coverage was
focussed on this new young
star, doing this giant project.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: But there always were
controversies.
According to Barrett, Trump
associated with known members
of organized crime.
Both while starting out in New
York and then building his
casinos in Atlantic city.
>> So, yeah, he had --
everywhere Donald went, he had
these mob allies and friends.
>> Bob: And another event early
in Trump's career follows him
still.
When he handled rentals for his
father's housing in New York,
the federal Justice department
accused them of trying to keep
out minority tenants.
Especially blacks.
Eventually the Trump signed an
agreement not to discriminate.
But the taint of racial animus
has wafted over Donald Trump
ever since.
Even at his televised roast.
>> Donald will say he wants to
run for president and mov on
into the white house.
Why not?
It wouldn't be the first time
he's push add black family out
of their home.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Amazing.
Amazing.
>> Bob: It's no laughing
matter.
There continues to be
allegations about Trump's
racism.
For example, this tweet that
81% of white American homicide
victims are killed by
African-Americans.
It's blatantly untrue.
In fact, none of these other
supposed facts are true.
And if Trump rallies, racial
tension seems to be just under
the surface.
That is until it boils over.
Each event begins with an
ominous kind of public service
announcement.
>> And the P.A. announcer
before the event basically tells
the audience, if somebody gets
up and starts causing a scene,
if there's a protester in the
middle of the event, please do
not touch or harm the protestor.
They actually instructed us to
just circle the person, shout
Trump, Trump, Trump at the
person and wait for security to
escort that person out.
[chanting Trump, Trump, Trump]
>> Bob: But the eviction
process is rarely that orderly.
>> Get 'em out of here.
Get out.
Get 'em out of here.
>> Bob: At this Trump speech in
Alabama, a black lives matter
protestor is punched and
kicked.
Trump suggests he was asking
for it.
>> This guy started screaming
by himself, and I don't know
rough up?
Maybe he should have been
roughed up because it was
absolutely disgusting what he
was doing.
>> Bob: Georgia.
Police with African-American
students from a Trump rally
on their own college campus.
>> Get 'em out.
Get 'em out.
>> I think we got kicked out
because we're a group of black
people.
And, like, I guess people,
what's going on in America,
they're afraid we're going
to say or do something.
>> Bob: Louisville, a young
African-American woman is
attacked by a Trump supporter
known to be a white
supremacist.
>> Throw 'em out.
>> Yeah, it happens at almost
every one of his events.
It's sort of this ritualistic
cleansing of the audience.
I mean, if you want to think
about it, in conjunction with
the things he said about
minorities and immigrants and
that sort of thing, it has
pretty powerful connotations.
>> I love the old days.
You know what they used to do
to guys like that when they
were in a place like this?
They'd be carried out on a
stretcher, folks.
>> Bob: It's especially so when
Donald Trump himself threatens
the violence.
As when a protestor interrupted
this rally in Nevada.
>> And you're walking out and
we're not allow -- you know,
the guards are very gentle with
him.
He's walking out with big high
fives, smiling, laughing.
I'd like to punch him in the
face, I tell yeah.
>> I love it when he says wanted
to punch a protestor in the
face.
He's never been in a fight in
his life.
I'll bet you he wouldn't know
how to fight.
You know, he calls other people
pussies.
But, please, Donald, you know
-- he'd go wash his hands if he
shook your hand.
>> Bob: In this campaign, the
violence and vulgarity seem to
be hallmarks of Trump rallies
alone.
And he doesn't appear to
discourage them.
In fact, the ugliness has only
been getting worse.
[CHEERING]
>> You look at also the cult of
personality that's developing
around this guy.
You don't just have to fear
Trump.
You have to fear the types of
people that are attracted to
Trump.
>> Bob: Rick Wilson is no
pasifist.
He's a pro gun main stream
republican strategist who says
he's dismayed by Donald Trump's
campaign.
He claims his election would be
a recipe for disaster.
[GUNFIRE]
>> If Trump become the
nominee and Trump becomes the
president by some horrible
turn, the Trump base will want
action.
They will want results.
And we've already seen sort of
raw edges of this thing.
And the preview of Trump's
America at some of these
rallies, that has become sort
of a hallmark of the get 'em
out, get 'em out, I want to
punch that guy in the face, and
not a thing without that
shouldn't concern people about
the psychology of mobs and
crowds, because that's what
Trump is very skillfully
manipulating and exploiting.
>> Tell me, tell me, isn't it
fun to be at a Trump rally?
[CHEERING]
>> Bob: When we return --
>> And I'm a leader.
I'm a leader.
I've always been a leader.
I've never had any problem
leading people.
If I say do it, they're gonna
do it.
>> Bob: Trump, the Savior.
>> I brought my bible.
Okay?
>> He has created this reality
TV figure who is this strong
man Savior who has come to
rescue everybody out there in
the heartland.
>> I would bomb the SHIT out of
them.
>> Bob: How far will he go?
Just watch.
>> I'd blow up every single
inch.
There would be nothing left.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: Whatever you believe
about Donald Trump's
presidential timber, he already
has the aircraft for the job.
The Trump Boeing 757 is
everybody bit as sleek as air
force one.
And even more luxurious with
fixtures and seat belts of 24
carat gold.
It is just one of the trappings
of the Trump campaign.
Call him alpha male or ego
maniac, he's obviously
convinced that he alone is
uniquely qualified to be
America's chief executive.
Veteran broadcast journalist
Tom Brokaw.
>> You can't believe that not
everyone shares his values.
That he thinks this is the way
the world was happiest.
And a lot of people do.
A lot of people do want to be
rich and famous.
With good reason.
They look at him and think oh,
my god.
You know, what a life.
(♪♪)
I was in aisle when the Trump
plane arrived, Trump on the
side.
It was carried live on local
television.
It was like a scene out of a
James Bond movie.
It was so dramatic.
You could just see people saying
oh, God, this guy's a big deal.
Everything he does is kind of
orchestrated and has a
theatrical quality about it.
>> Bob: Trump uses his
independent wealth to portray
himself as the honest broker.
not beholden to special
interests, an outsider primed
to take on the corrupt
Washington establishment.
>> I don't need anybody's
money.
It's nice.
I don't need anybody's money.
I'm using my own money.
I'm not using the lobbyists.
I'm not using donors.
I don't care.
I'm really rich.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: It's the role that
Donald Trump plays both on
screen and off.
According to writer Matt
Taibbi.
>> He has created this reality
TV figure, who is this strong
man Savior who has come to
rescue everybody out there in
the heartland.
(♪♪)
His version of events is
essentially that he's a whistle
blower, who is come to protect
everybody.
Like, I know how this system
works because I've been part
of it.
I've seen how rotten it is.
So trust me.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: Think 21st century folk
hero.
The billionaire robin hood
celebrated in songs online.
And every corner of American
culture.
>> And the next president of
the United States, Mr. Donald
J. Trump!
>> Bob: Trump supporters want
and expect the authoritarian
anti-establishment President
he's promised to be, according
to Brooke Gladstone of National
Public Radio.
>> A daddy who can take care of
all the problems.
>> And I think that they see
that in Donald Trump.
>> Wow.
Thank you.
So fantastic.
Well, you know, I love Ohio.
I have a long history with Ohio.
>> Bob: But a strong man needs
an enemy.
Someone or something to
overcome.
Or better yet, obliterate.
>> You ready for a commander in
chief who will let our warriors
do their job and go kick ISIS
ASS?
>> I would bomb the SHIT out of
them.
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
>> Bob: NPR's Brook Gladstone
argues that by appealing to
prejudice and fear, Trump is
fulfilling the dictionary
definition of a demagogue.
>> Donald Trump is a true
demagogue.
The facts don't matter.
They can be true or they can be
false.
He doesn't care, as long as
they're useful.
It doesn't seem that his
supporters care much about his
positions.
All they talk about, when I
hear people interviewing them
on the street, is that he's
strong.
And that he can make deals.
>> Welcome to a kingdom where
everybody's treated like a
king.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: She says in the
fictional kingdom of Trump,
his perceived strength is
often based on misimpression
or lies.
Like the so-called success of
his casinos.
>> You can say well, you know,
he did go bankrupt.
You know, he's not self made.
He got a $1 million loan from
his father.
He messed up the casinos in
Atlantic city.
And all these buildings with
his name on it in the United
States are owned by foreign
powers.
A lot of which are in the
Middle East.
None of that seems to really
matter.
>> Bob: Trump, the strong man,
allies himself with others who
are strong, quoting Mussolini,
flattering Vladimir Putin.
>> He's actually liked in his
country which is hard to believe
because he's essentially a
dictator and I think he has
an 80% approval rating which
you know, any politician in
this country would love to have.
(♪♪)
>> Now we're talking about
water boarding.
>> Bob: Strong men also talk
tough.
Pressed about the legality of
torturing terror suspects, even
killing their families, Trump
said this about the generals
who would report to him as
commander-in-chief.
>> And I'm a leader.
I'm a leader.
I've always been a leader.
I've never had any problem
leading people.
If I say do it, they're gonna
do it.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: And every strong man,
especially a U.S. presidential
candidate, better have a gun.
(♪♪)
What else could explain why
Trump's republican opponent,
senator Ted Cruz, a man running
for the world's most powerful
office, would do this.
Wrapping bacon around an AR-15
semi automatic rifle, firing
off a few hundred rounds.
Until it's cooked just the way
he likes it.
Crispy.
>> Machine gun bacon.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Bob: Trump used the Paris
terror attacks to tout his pro
gun credentials, explaining the
massacre like this.
>> So prior to Paris, which was
a disaster, which by the way,
if some of the people in those
places where it was slaughter,
absolute slaughter, had guns,
you wouldn't have had the
carnage that you had in Paris.
You wouldn't have had that
carnage.
>> Bibles and guns brought us
here.
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
>> Bob: And in America today,
it's an article of faith that
strength comes from within.
So every presidential candidate
must be a man or woman of god.
>> I brought my bible.
Faith is also a campaign
prerequisite for Donald Trump.
>> You know, it's first
Presbyterian church, Jamaica,
and this was written by my
mother, with my name.
It was a long time ago.
>> Bob: Investigative
journalist and Trump
biographer, Wayne Barrett.
In all of your research over
all of those years, did you
encounter a strong bent of
Christianity in his life?
>> It's a total fraud.
It's a total fraud.
>> Bob: Look, you're not
questioning his faith?
>> Well, I saw that interview
once where he said, well, I go
on Easter.
And I go on Christmas.
And then he's sort of
scratching his head and oh,
and Sundays.
Sometimes I go on Sundays, you
know.
I mean, please.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: Whether you think he's
a sincere Christian or not,
evangelicals are increasingly
among the millions of middle
class Americans flocking to the
Donald.
(♪♪)
♪ On your feet ♪
♪ Stand up tall ♪
♪ Freedom's on our shoulders
U.S.A. ♪
>> We won with highly educated.
We won with poorly educated.
I love the poorly educated.
>> Despite him saying I love
the poorly educated, which he
said the other night, the
reality is he's probably never
had a conversation with
anybody, you know, of the
class, you know, that he's
giving speeches to now.
In his life, before this year.
I mean, he hangs around with
models and sports stars and
politicians and other
billionaires.
That's his crew.
>> They say I have the most
loyal people.
Did you ever say that?
I could stand in the middle of
5th Avenue and shoot somebody
and I wouldn't lose any voters,
okay?
It's, like, incredible.
>> Bob: Indeed, Trump's appeal
has expanded.
Far beyond his original base of
angry, white males, who may
feel left behind by U.S.
elites.
>> Now we've kind of hit a
ceiling on the American dream.
Those people have been out
there.
They're unhappy, with good
reason, about how America has
been governing itself.
We have a congress that is
the worst I've ever seen,
democrat and republican.
They can't be seen saying hello
to each other on either side.
Tom Brokaw says there's anger
in America.
A feeling of betrayal by
government, especially in
Washington.
And Donald Trump has drilled
deep down into it.
>> What the American people
really want is financial
security.
And they don't feel they have
that anymore.
And that is a huge issue that
no one's addressing in a
forensic way.
How do we change that?
So Donald Trump gave voice to
their anger.
And now there is the
possibility that he can get the
nomination, A.
And B, get elected.
It still is a long shot it
seems to me, but, you know, we
have been surprised one time
after another in the last nine
months.
>> Bob: When we come back, what
frightens even republicans.
>> Do you want to give an
entertainer and showman with
poor impulse control a vengeful
streak and a vicious temper
control 7,700 nuclear weapons?
(♪♪)
>> Bob: January 21, 2017, the
morning after the inauguration,
the first full day of the
presidency of Donald J. Trump.
In the oval office, the 45th
president of the United States
gets to work.
But what's on the to-do list of
a man presumably elected
because the American public is
so furious at everyone else?
Legendary broadcaster Tom
Brokaw has seen presidents come
and go.
He says none faced a learning
curve like Donald Trump.
>> I don't think he really has
a full appreciation of just how
complex that job is.
It's the hardest job in the
world, by far.
And it's not just being the
public face of the white house.
You've got to be in there with
your hands on the gears.
You have to have a smart,
natural security and foreign
policy, economic policy that
plays across America.
Not just one segment or
another.
(♪♪)
>> Bob: That degree of
difficulty would be compounded
by the expectations of Trump's
base.
Who put him in the white house.
If he's played the race card,
they'll be counting on him to
follow through with action.
>> Well, he's playing to the
group that feels, you know,
that this should be a white,
Christian America, that Muslims
are responsible for all the
difficulties that we have just
because there were Muslims
involved in the bombing of the
world trade centre and the
pentagon, that all Muslims are
guilty in some fashion.
>> The U.S. has become a dumping
ground for everybody else's
problems.
[CHEERING]
>> Thank you.
>> I mean, I can't imagine any
circumstances under which if he
were president of the United
States he wouldn't try to build
the wall, wouldn't try to
deport millions of Latinos.
>> Bob: Investigative
journalist and author Wayne
Barrett predicts as president
Trump would attempt to fulfill
his promises.
The wall, the Muslim ban,
deportations.
>> It's gonna be
extraordinarily ugly.
I mean, imagine massive
deportations in this country.
but I think he's going to try
to do that.
>> Bob: And there are fears
about foreign policy.
The likelihood of a trade war
with China and his threat to
rip up the nuclear agreement
with Iran have fellow
republicans running scared.
>> Never, ever, ever in my life
have I seen any transaction so
incompetently negotiated as our
deal with Iran.
>> Bob: His opponents in the
party desperate to build a wall
between themselves and Trump.
>> Mr. Trump's bombast is
already alarming our allies
and fuelling the enmity
of our enemies.
>> There are other people in
our party who actually are kind
of horrified by Donald Trump.
I'm one of them.
>> Guys, we have a con artist
as the front runner in the
republican party.
>> Once you're president, you
have this awesome and terrible
responsibility to actually be
president.
You're not a show host anymore.
>> I don't know what I said, I
don't remember.
>> You have to run a
government.
Run a country.
I think his judgment is so
terrible.
>> I want a general who will
knock the hell out of them.
Yeah!
>> It's gonna be a disaster on
every front.
>> Bob: Mainstream republican
strategist Rick Wilson believes
the presidency of Donald J.
Trump would destroy the
republican party and severely
damage the U.S..
>> It's gonna wreck the
American economy in ways that
it's going to reverberate for
decades.
He wants to feed that monster
he's built, and he's gonna try
to do it.
It's going to be nearly
impossible.
It's going to cause enormous
disruption.
>> Bob: Disruption is a theme
at Trump rallies.
>> Oh!
>> Get 'em out.
Get 'em out.
>> Bob: They're exercises in
demagoguery.
Calculated the target not just
protestors, but also to control
the media, who he sees as the
enemy.
And they're verbally flogged by
Trump to the cheers of his
crowds.
>> By the way, I hate some of
these people, but I'd never
kill them.
I hate them.
No, these people, I would never
kill them.
Let's see.
Well ...
no, I wouldn't.
>> Bob: He's vowed to clamp
down on freedom of the press.
>> If I become president, oh,
do they have problems.
They're gonna have such
problems.
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
>> Bob: Republican Rick Wilson
worries what more Donald Trump
could do with all the power of
the oval office.
>> We're looking at this guy,
who is a great entertainer and
a great showman, but do you
want to give an entertainer and
a showman with poor impulse
control a vengeful streak and a
vicious temper, control of
7,700 nuclear weapons?
>> I love you.
I love you, folks.
Thank you.
>> Bob: Since he declared his
candidacy, most assumed there
would come a tipping point for
Trump, when someone would trip
him up or he'd trip himself.
It's what Tom Brokaw thought.
>> I keep thinking that there
is a breaking point, but there
seems not to be.
I mean, the republicans are
either running for cover or
holding their head in their
hands or saying what are we
going to do if we get this guy
as a nominee?
These vulgarisms that he
engaged in at any other time in
American political life would
have been a kind of knife in
the heart of the candidate.
But we have changed.
And part of it is the culture
of America.
[chanting USA]
>> Bob: Which is why this has
been one of the most
extraordinary episodes in
American politics.
The woman hoping to make
history in the white house is
now in for a vicious fight.
>> People ask me all the time,
well, who do I want to run
against?
That's not for me to decide.
But given what they've all
said, I will take any one of
them.
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
>> Bob: The billionaire who's
somehow surrogate for the
little guy.
His party running against its
own presumptive nominee.
The vulgarity and half truths
seen as condor and a fresh
voice.
Blame it all on the
establishment.
Credit a clever strategy.
Or call it a perfect political
storm.
>> It's brilliant in a lot of
ways what he's done.
He's manipulated the entire
political media system.
it's like any good long con.
You know, everybody's gone from
the scene by the time you
realize you've lost your money.
That's what it's going to be
like with Trump.
People will not going to realize
what he's accomplished until
he's already in the white
house.
(♪♪)